---
layout: post
title: GoBox
obituary: A busybox clone in Go
startdate: 2011-06-21
categories: [project]
---
## The project
The source is hosted on [GitHub].

## LiveCD
A [bootable CD][livecd] of v0.2 can be found on Rapidshare.

## The idea
While playing around with Amazon EC2, I realized that using a full-fleged Debian as a base system may be convenient but just as wasteful. The same applies to OpenVZ container templates. A fresh container serving a simple webpage wastes 400 MB of disk space and about 200 MB of RAM if Apache is used.  While trying to use [Tiny Core Linux] and similar distros as a base image (and failing at it), I felt the need for something different.

## Decision for a technology
[BusyBox] is a good solution to this, but it is written in C, has confusingly many applets (and options) and a webserver is – as far as I remember – not among them. It being written in C is a valid argument in the sense that it might be vulnerable to buffer overflows and other security flaws.  Additionally, the source code is unnecessarily hard to manage.

One of my core requirements was static linking, so the footprint could be kept small and I would not have to worry about libraries. At this point I turned to Go for multiple reasons:

 * Go is **statically linked** by default (at least it used to be and it is easy to switch back the old behaviour. See below).
 * Go’s **syntax is incredibly lightweight** with a great **standard library**. The code will be easy to read and maintain and a lot of boilerplate can be avoided due to the library.
 * **Native concurrency and networking** makes writing applets common to server systems quite easy. The [current implementation of a webserver][httpd] is 27 lines, 26 of which are the default applet boilerplate.
 * Go is **safe**. There are no pointer arithmetics, a garbage collector and string is a native type. Thus remote execution holes are fairly unlikely and memory leaks are not the developer’s responsibility.
 * Not really relevant: Go is **cross plattform**. Theoretically it could be just as easily used on Mac or Windows systems as it can be on Linux.
 * Go’s binaries have quite the overhead (i.e. a lot of code being linked into the final executable). Letting a lot of applets share those linked routines (hopefully) cancels this drawback out.

## Vision
With GoBox a administrator should be able to **run a server**. All the **common service daemons** should be included, easy to configure and have a safe implementation. The **memory usage should be kept low** as well as **the size of the executable** itself.

## Talks

* October, 11th 2011: [Berlin Hack and Tell]
* October, 13th 2011: [Go User Group Berlin]

## Gained experience
### Static linking with Go
As it turns out, Go is not statically linked by default anymore. After spending some time trying to research the reason for this change, I found the answer in a post on [Go’s user mailing list][gonuts] which stated that they replaced their implementation of DNS lookup routines by links to the ones in the *glibc* for performance reasons (Unfortunately, I lost the link to that particular thread).  Of course, this requires dynamic linking. So, the second I imported the `net` package, I got a dynamically linked executable.

Luckily, one of the follow-up posts showed how to revert to the old, self-written function of the Go library, effectively enabling static linking.  All I needed to do was disabling `cgo` (a meta-programmer for creating C-bindings in Go) when compiling the `net` package. The default Makefile made this fairly easy:

	$ cd $(GOROOT)/src/pkg/net
	$ make nuke
	$ CGO_ENABLED=0 make
	$ CGO_ENABLED=0 make install

Another thing I learned was that XCode, which provides C/C++ compilers for Mac OS X, does not include a `crt1.o`. Therefore, static linking is not possible on OS X. I cannot think of a single reason why Apple would actively prevent you from creating statically linked executables.

### OpenVZ is a bitch
Trying to deploy a tar'd system image of [GoBox v0.2] to an OpenVZ machine I had set up in VMWare, I had to struggle with OpenVZ and its minimalistic errors and documentation.
The main problem I had - or at least that’s what I guessed - were missing files in the image. Who knows what OpenVZ needs to properly boot a container?! I found nothing. Apparently, no one ever tried to bootstrap a minimal container image.
To solve this problem I actually whipped out [`strace`] and analyzed what kind of `open()` calls failed immediately before some kind of error message was issued. Here’s my list of all the files OpenVZ needs to boot a container (not necessarily complete):

* `/sbin/init`: *Cannot* be symlink
* `/etc/inittab`: Even though there is no `init` which would use this file
* `/var/log`: During boot, OpenVZ seems creates a FIFO here to act as `/dev/console`
* `/etc/localtime`
* `/proc`: For mounting proc
* `/sys`: For mounting sysfs
* `/dev/zero`: A lot of scripts usually use this one way or the other
* `/dev/null`: ditto

It turns out OpenVZ is injecting actual bash scripts into the container to do setup work so my incompatible shell won’t do. I layed off of OpenVZ for now and will concentrate on QEmu and similar for testing until I work out a solution on how to be compliant to OpenVZ’s initalization routines.

[GitHub]: http://www.github.com/asdf-systems/gobox "GoBox’s repository on GitHub"
[BusyBox]: http://www.busybox.net "The swiss army knife of the command line"
[gonuts]: http://groups.google.com/group/golang-nuts "Mailing list of Go users"
[httpd]: https://github.com/asdf-systems/gobox/blob/5b0d17b42030e350f48c9a10938c4a9739b62030/applets/httpd/httpd.go "Httpd implemenation of Sep 7th 2011"
[GoBox v0.2]: https://github.com/asdf-systems/gobox/tree/v0.2 "Code of GoBox version 0.2"
[strace]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Strace "Logs all syscalls another process makes"
[livecd]: https://rapidshare.com/files/2661878002/gobox.iso "Bootable CD image of GoBox v0.2"
[Berlin Hack and Tell]: http://www.meetup.com/berlin-hack-and-tell "Monthly meetup for 5 minute presentations"
[Go User Group Berlin]: http://www.meetup.com/golang-users-berlin/ "Berlin’s usergroup for Go developers"
